Initial thoughts on WG process (#54)
uk-tre/community-management: governance/working groups/index.md

# Working groups

> For the UK TRE Community, a Working Group (WG) is the main method through which community outputs are created.

Reviewer: I agree that we should fully support "dissenting" WGs, though I'd probably phrase it as WGs looking at alternative approaches 😄

> WGs can be set up by any member of the community, and are focused on producing specific, tangible outputs within a given time period, and are modelled off the pre-existing concept of Working Groups found in communities like [DARE UK](https://dareuk.org.uk/dare-uk-launches-dynamic-collaborative-communities-invites-proposals-for-new-groups/), the [Research Data Alliance (RDA)](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/creating-and-managing-rda-groups/creating-or-joining-rda-working-group.html), the [W3C](https://www.w3.org/2017/Process-20170301/#GAGeneral) and more.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
WGs can be set up by any member of the community, and are focused on producing specific, tangible outputs within a given time period.
They are modelled on the pre-existing concept of Working Groups found in communities like [DARE UK](https://dareuk.org.uk/dare-uk-launches-dynamic-collaborative-communities-invites-proposals-for-new-groups/), the [Research Data Alliance (RDA)](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/creating-and-managing-rda-groups/creating-or-joining-rda-working-group.html), and the [W3C](https://www.w3.org/2017/Process-20170301/#GAGeneral).
```

> There are two distinct processes for those considering creating WGs to consider:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two distinct processes for those creating a WG to consider:
```

> 1. The establishment of the WG
> 2. The community endorsement of the WG outputs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

1. The establishment of the WG
2. The community endorsement of the WG outputs
```

> As the UK TRE community's primary focus is to act as a signposting and convening body for the TRE space in the UK and beyond, we have made a conscious effort to separate out the questions of:
> - Work that is happening within the community (WG establishment)
> - Outputs/resources for which there is community consensus and endorsement (community endorsement)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As the UK TRE community's primary focus is to act as a signposting and convening body for the TRE space in the UK and beyond, we have made a conscious effort to separate out the questions of:

- Work that is happening within the community (WG establishment)
- Outputs/resources for which there is community consensus and endorsement (community endorsement)
```

Therefore it is important to note that establishing a WG with the UK TRE community **does not** imply any outputs of the WG are endorsed by the UK TRE Community.

## Process
### Establishing a Working group

1. Member(s) suggesting a working group fill in the [Working Group Charter](working-group-charter.md).

> 2. The Charter is reviewed by the [Steering Group]() to ensure it:

Reviewer: Is the steering group the same as the (possible renamed) CMWG, as opposed to a WG steering group?

Author: I am updating this to be clearer - the CMWG and SG are different - the CMWG is responsible for quickly checking whether the proposal fits with community principles and isn't being done anywhere else, the SG comes in later for formal approval/rejection (this will make more sense after the next commit)

    - Aligns with [community principles]()
    - Represents new work being undertaken in the community
3. If the Charter is rejected by the [Steering Group](), feedback is provided to the submitting member(s) on why, and the Working Group returns to step 1.

> 4. If the Charter is approved by the [Steering Group](), the Charter is made available for community review via an Issue on the [UK TRE GitHub](https://github.com/uk-tre/community-management) for a period of 2 weeks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. If the Charter is approved by the [Steering Group](), the Charter is made available for community review via an Issue on the [UK TRE GitHub](https://github.com/uk-tre/community-management) for a period of at least 2 weeks.
```
Allows leeway for Christmas, or to extend the period if there's ongoing discussion.

> 4. If the Charter is approved by the [Steering Group](), the Charter is made available for community review via an Issue on the [UK TRE GitHub](https://github.com/uk-tre/community-management) for a period of 2 weeks.

Reviewer 2: There is a difference between making available and calling for feedback.

> It was on display in the bottom of a locked filing cabinet stuck in a disused lavatory with a sign on the door saying Beware of the Leopard.

Reviewer 3: We should explicitly include in the Community main channels: mailists, slack and GH board(?)

Reviewer 3: Community updates during events should also be used to communicate new WGs created or proposed

Reviewer: I think we should setup an announcements only email list (or newsletter list), everything else is liable to be lost amongst other information.

> 5. If, after a period of 2 weeks, there are no unresolved objections to the Charter, the working group is established :tada: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. If, after a the review period, there are no unresolved objections to the Charter, the working group is established :tada: 
```

> 6. If there are unresolved objections, these are reviewed by the [Steering Group](). Any outstanding objections requiring review after this are collated and shared with the Working Group proposers for updating the charter, and the Working Group returns to step 4.

Author: Put some thoughts together in this doc: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1SxFnmMKcfsYaO4wjHdiBfGOgPATIsTwRKaLbyjoN1pA/edit

7. Once a Working Group is established, they are formally recognised on the [UK TRE Community website](https://www.uktre.org/), and the community is notified of its creation.

### Endorsing Working Group outputs

1. When a WG has outputs ready to share with the community, they notify the [Steering Group]()
2. The draft outputs are reviewed by the [Steering Group]() to ensure it:
    - Aligns with [community principles]()

> 3. If approved by the [Steering Group](), the draft outputs are made available for community review via an Issue on the [UK TRE GitHub](https://github.com/uk-tre/community-management) for a period of 4 weeks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. If approved by the [Steering Group](), the draft outputs are made available for community review via an Issue on the [UK TRE GitHub](https://github.com/uk-tre/community-management) for a period of at least 4 weeks.
```
We can tighten up the deadlines later, for now I think flexibility is helpful.

4. At the end of this 4 week period, 3 outcomes are possible:

> #### Rejection
> The community rejects the draft outputs of the WG.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Rejection

The community rejects the draft outputs of the WG.
```

The [Steering Group]() will collate the reasons for rejection and share these with the WG.
The WG can decide to either close out the working group, or amend the outputs to resolve any reasons for rejection.

> #### Approved for distribution
> The community approves the outputs for distribution. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Approved for distribution

The community approves the outputs for distribution. 
```

The UK TRE community will signpost to the outputs, but will not specifically endorse them.
The WG can decide to either close out the working group, or amend the outputs to work towards endorsement.

> #### Approved and endorsed
> The community approves the outputs for distribution, and explicitly endorses them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Approved and endorsed

The community approves the outputs for distribution, and explicitly endorses them.
```

The UK TRE community will signpost to the outputs, and formally endorse them publicly.

The WG outputs will be tagged with a version referencing this endorsement.
If the WG wants to amend/update these outputs, they will have to go through the endorsement process above again. 
No future versions beyond the tagged version are guaranteed to be endorsed by the community.

### Closing a Working Group

1. The Working group completes the [Working Groups closure form]() confirming its termination.
2. The [Steering Group]() reviews this form, and when approved, lists this working group under `Historical Working Groups`.

> ### Recommendations
> In order to maximise the chance of community endorsement for Working Group outputs, we recommend all working groups:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Recommendations

In order to maximise the chance of community endorsement for Working Group outputs, we recommend all working groups:
```

Reviewer 3: I think we may need to do more than recommend, updates and contribution mechanisms should be mandatory. And recommend that if any pushback/dissenting opinions exist in the community then special attention is put to include them

Author: Agree but where do you think this stuff belongs? Probs not here (these are softer 'best practice' recommendations.

I guess if they are ignoring dissenting opinions that will be picked up by the Steering Group in their formal review?

2. The draft outputs are reviewed by the [Community Management Working Group]() to ensure it:
    - Aligns with [community principles]()
3. If approved by the [Community Management Working Group](), the draft outputs are made available for community review, and shared with the community, via an Issue on the [UK TRE GitHub](https://github.com/uk-tre/community-management) for a period of at least 28 days.
4. At the end of this period, based on community input the outputs will be considered by the [Steering Group]() with 3 possible outcomes:

#### Rejection

The [Steering Group]() rejects the draft outputs of the WG.

The [Steering Group]() will collate the reasons for rejection and share these with the WG.
The WG can decide to either close out the working group, or amend the outputs to resolve any reasons for rejection.

#### Approved for distribution

The [Steering Group]() approves the outputs for distribution. 

The UK TRE community will signpost to the outputs, but will not specifically endorse them.
The WG can decide to either close out the working group, or amend the outputs to work towards endorsement.

> #### Approved and endorsed

Reviewer 3: I want to discuss this briefly today before approving. I am unsure where we said for endorsement outputs will need to be presented at a quarterly event and have a follow up review/discussion period

The [Steering Group]() approves the outputs for distribution, and explicitly endorses them.

> The UK TRE community will signpost to the outputs, and formally endorse them publicly.

Reviewer: Have we defined what it means to "endorse" something?

> The decision to endorse a Working Group output will be more rigorous, and therefore likely take longer, than the decision to approve outputs for distribution.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The decision to endorse a Working Group output will be more rigorous, and therefore likely take longer, than the decision to approve outputs for distribution.
To be endorsed an output will need to have been sufficiently discussed and have clear and wide support, the SG will make explicitly clear why it considers the discussion and support to be enough.

The SG will announce when an output is being endorsed, the output will then
1. Be presented at a Quarterly Event by the WG
2. Its endorsment be open for community review for a period of 7 days in line with the [Consensus, Review and Objection Management]() process. During this period the focus will be on reviewing endorsement, not content.
3. Be ratified for endorsement by the SG, or decide to only approve
```

If Working Groups are happy for their outputs to simply be approved and not endorsed by the community, they should make this clear to the [Steering Group](). 

The WG outputs will be tagged with a version referencing this endorsement.
If the WG wants to amend/update these outputs, they will have to go through the endorsement process above again. 

No future versions beyond the tagged version are guaranteed to be endorsed by the community.

### Closing a Working Group

1. The Working group completes the [Working Groups closure form]() confirming its termination.
2. The [Community Mangement Working Group]() reviews this form, and when approved, lists this working group under `Historical Working Groups`.

### Recommendations

Outputs that have transparently engaged the community and reflect community consensus on the issue at hand are the most likely to be endorsed. In order to maximise the chance of community endorsement for Working Group outputs, we recommend all working groups:

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

- Share ideas for WGs widely with the community and incorporate feedback into their charter before submission
```
